# Project: Data-Lake  

## Purpose

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Datasets

The input data contains two S3 buckets:
* Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
* Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

### Song Dataset

The song dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset] (http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

```json
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

### Log Dataset

The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator] (https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

## ETL pipeline

The ETL pipeline (see `etl.py`) loads the S3 data sources into Spark dataframes, transforms the data into the described schema and saves the data to S3 in the parquet format.

1.  Load data from S3
    
    -   Song data:  `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
    -   Log data:  `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`
    
    The script reads song_data and load_data from S3.
    
2.  Transform data by Spark
    
    Transform the data into create four dimension tables and one fact table: 
    
    #### Fact Table
    
    songplays: songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

    #### Dimension Tables
    
    users: user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

    songs: song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

    artists: artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

    time: start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
    
3.  Save data in S3
    
    Save each table created in S3 in parquet format

## Instructions

1. Create an AWS IAM role with S3 read and write access. Enter the IAM's credentials (AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID, AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY) in the `dl.cfg` configuration file.  

2. Create an S3 bucket for storing output data, enter the S3 path as 'output_data' in `etl.py`.  

3. Run `python3 etl.py`.